 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Liver Network 
 
 
 
Guidelines for the Management of Adults with 
Asymptomatic Liver Blood Test Abnormalities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prof Stuart McPherson  
On behalf of the North East & North Cumbria Hepatology Network 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
2 
  
 
Introduction 
 
This guideline relates to adults with only vague or no symptoms or signs of liver 
disease, found to have abnormal liver blood tests.  This guideline does not apply to 
children. 
 
It is recognised that abnormal liver blood tests are an increasingly common 
presentation in primary care, in part due to the growing number of individuals with 
metabolic dysfunction associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD; formerly named 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease [NAFLD]). 
 
This guideline makes recommendations for the diagnosis and management of adults 
with abnormal liver blood tests with little or no symptoms, and is intended for use by 
all clinicians in the North East and North Cumbria in the diagnosis and management 
of these patients. The interventions should be offered to all people who are likely to 
benefit, irrespective of race, disability, gender, age, sexual orientation or religion. 
Information should be provided to patients in an accessible format and consideration 
should be given to mobility and communication issues, and being aware of sensitive 
and cultural issues. 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
3 
STEP 1 – PATTERN RECOGNITION 
 
What sort of abnormality do the abnormal liver blood tests suggest? 
 
a. Isolated raised bilirubin – most commonly due to Gilbert’s syndrome. This is 
a benign condition and does not need referral. It occurs in about 5% of the 
population.   
 
Repeat Liver blood tests on a fasting sample with an FBC.  The bilirubin 
should rise further and there should be no evidence of anaemia.  If the patient 
is anaemic haemolysis needs to be excluded (reticulocyte count, LDH). 
 
b. Cholestatic pattern – Alkaline phosphatase (Alk phos) raised significantly 
more than ALT. Remember bone causes of raised Alk phos e.g. Paget’s 
Disease. Repeating Liver blood tests with a GGT can help confirm a liver 
cause. 
 
c. Hepatitic pattern – Most marked abnormality is a raised ALT (and AST if 
reported), though Alk phos and/or GGT may also be raised.  These can be 
short-lived, due to intercurrent illness or muscular injury, reverting to normal a 
few days or weeks later.  The bulk of this guidance refers to patients with this 
pattern of abnormality. 
 
d. Isolated raised GGT (GGT is not routinely analysed in a liver enzyme panel 
in many Trusts unless specifically requested) - GGT is the most common liver 
enzyme abnormality in people with alcohol-related liver disease and metabolic 
dysfunction associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD). It can also be raised 
in other liver conditions such as drug-induced liver injury, hepatic congestion 
secondary to heart failure, liver metastases and cholestatic liver disorders 
(usually with raised ALP). While a particularly high level of GGT, such as 
>1000 U/L, is frequently associated with excessive alcohol consumption, more 
modest elevations (up to 500 U/L) are very commonly seen in patients with 
MASLD and can be accompanied by a normal or raised ALT.

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
4 
STEP 2 – FIRST ASSESSMENT 
 
Given that the most common causes of abnormal liver blood tests are MASLD (fatty 
liver associated with features of the metabolic syndrome), potentially harmful alcohol 
consumption and adverse drug reactions, a careful drug/alcohol history should be 
taken and other features of the metabolic syndrome (hypertension, diabetes, obesity 
and abnormal lipids) should be sought.  Consider using the AUDIT or FAST 
questionnaire for detecting hazardous or harmful drinking.  Patients should be given 
general advice as appropriate (reduction in alcohol intake, weight reduction by diet 
and exercise) and any drugs known to be associated with drug induced liver injury 
should be suspended if possible.  Of particular note are NSAIDs.  These should be 
stopped and liver blood tests repeated after 3 months. In cholestatic abnormalities 
antibiotics, especially flucloxacillin, are relatively common cause. 
 
Many other drugs that cause abnormal liver blood tests are more difficult to stop (e.g. 
neuroleptics, anti-epileptics).  Referral to liver advice and guidance or obtaining 
advice from the prescribing specialist may be appropriate in these circumstances.  
Patients with high risk alcohol consumption (AUDIT ≥15) should be referred to 
addiction services when appropriate. 
 
Repeat the liver blood tests, requesting AST and γGT also, with an FBC. 
 
When to repeat the liver blood tests? 
 
a. Isolated raised bilirubin – fasting sample when convenient 
b. Isolated raised Alk phos (confirmed as liver with GGT) – no delay needed 
c. Isolated ALT – repeat in 1-3 months 
d. Isolated GGT - repeat in 1-3 months 
e. A raised ALT or Alk phos that is over 3x the upper limit of normal should 
have the above done without delay at the same time as a liver screen and 
USS (step 3) 
f. A raised ALT or raised Alk phos, in combination with raised bilirubin should 
be referred routinely to a liver clinic or gastroenterologist. 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
5 
Please order an USS of liver / spleen / pancreas routinely at the same 
time. 
 
The presence of unexplained clinical jaundice should lead to immediate 
referral. 
 
STEP 3 – SECOND ASSESSMENT (PERSISTENTLY ABNORMAL LIVER BLOOD 
TESTS) 
 
If the abnormalities have persisted for 1-3 months despite the above measures, then 
a liver screen should be arranged  (see below). In some parts of the region (Durham 
and Cumbria) intelligent liver function tests (iLFT) can be requested which is an 
automated approach to conducting this testing: 
 
a. Viral screen (HBsAg, HCVAb, HIV test) 
b. Autoantibodies – ANA, AMA, ASMA and immunoglobulins 
c. Coeliac screen (TTG Ab) 
d. Ferritin and Transferrin Saturation 
e. HbA1c and fasting lipids 
f. USS liver, biliary tree, pancreas  - request for all patients with cholestatic 
liver enzymes or patients aged ≥ 50 years with hepatitic or mixed pattern of 
liver enzymes . An USS liver is not essential for patients with 
suspected steatotic (fatty)  liver disease under 50 years who have a 
low FIB -4 score (<1.3) as these scans do not  usually add any 
additional information.  
 
STEP 4 – DECIDE WHO TO REFER 
 
The history taken and results so far should point to possible pathologies causing the 
abnormal liver blood tests.  Most of the list below will need referral for further 
assessment and management. 
 
• Chronic viral hepatitis – history of risk behaviours, blood transfusion and positive 
viral hepatitis serology. 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
6 
• Primary biliary cholangitis – raised Alk phos (cholestatic pattern), positive anti-
mitochondrial antibody. 
• Primary sclerosing cholangitis – history of inflammatory bowel disease, 
cholestatic pattern on liver blood tests. 
• Autoimmune hepatitis – positive autoantibodies (smooth muscle, antinuclear 
antibodies and typically a raised IgG), might have history of other autoimmune 
diseases,  
• Haemochromatosis – raised ferritin and transferrin saturation (>45%). Might 
have history of diabetes and joint pain.  
• USS – the presence of dilated bile ducts requires further assessment and 
URGENT hospital referral on an NCA Upper GI pathway. Any reported dilation 
of the biliary tree is significant. 
 
Many of these patients in the list below will not require referral.  Low risk patients with 
steatotic liver disease can be managed in primary care. 
 
• Alcohol-related liver disease 
o from history, raised MCV,  raised ferritin with normal transferrin 
saturation, steatosis on USS.  
o Advanced alcohol -related liver disease is indicated by nodular liver, 
splenomegaly or other si gns of portal hypertension on USS , l ow 
platelets, low albumin or raised bilirubin 
• Metabolic dysfunction steatotic liver disease (MASLD; formally named NAFLD)  
o Patients likely to have raised BMI or increased waist circumference, 
hypertension, pre-diabetes or diabetes, raised fasting triglyceride and 
low HDL cholesterol. 
o Not consuming more than 14 units alcohol per week for females and 21 
units per week for males 
o An USS may show a steatotic liver, but a ‘normal ultrasound’ does not 
exclude mild steatosis  
o The Liver screen is usually negative, although 10% will have low level 
liver autoantibodies (with a normal IgG level). A raised ferritin (with 
transferrin saturation <45%) is seen in a third of cases. IgA is raised in 
about half of cases. 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
7 
• MetALD (people with metabolic associated steatosis who consume 
moderately excessive alcohol) 
o Same clinical features as above 
o Alcohol consumption 14-40 units per week for females and 21-50 units 
per week for males. 
 
The hazardous drinker without evidence of advanced liver disease requires advice, 
regular counselling and, where appropriate, referral to secondary care alcohol 
specialists (AUDIT score ≥15). These patients do not require referral to liver clinics. 
 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
8 
STEP 5 – RISK STRATIFICATION OF PATIENTS WITH MASLD or MetALD 
 
Steatotic liver disease represents a spectrum of metabolic syndrome-associated liver 
disease progressing from simple steatosis (fat but no inflammation or hepatocellular 
injury), through to steatohepatitis (MASH = fat + inflammation+ hepatocellular injury) 
and fibrosis to cirrhosis.  Estimates suggest that up to a third of the population has 
MASLD.  Approximately 40% of patients with MASLD develop progressive fibrosis, 
which can progress to cirrhosis in 10%. Patients with cirrhosis are at risk life 
threatening liver related complications, such as hepatocellular carcinoma, portal 
hypertension and liver failure. 
 
Stage of liver fibrosis is the most important prognostic factor and patients with 
moderate or severe liver fibrosis are at significant risk of liver-related complications in 
the future.  There are algorithms based on simple blood tests and clinical parameters 
that can accurately exclude advanced fibrosis, and these can be used to triage 
patients who require referral to secondary care for further investigation and 
management.  The FIB-4 score and NAFLD fibrosis score have been well validated 
for this purpose. We recommend using the FIB-4 score as it is the most accurate 
simple score available and is simpler than the NAFLD fibrosis score to calculate. 
 
For all patients with a clinical diagnosis of MASLD or MetALD who have had other 
causes of liver disease excluded the FIB-4 score should be calculated. 
 
To calculate the FIB-4 score you need 
– Age 
– AST 
– ALT 
– Platelets 
An online calculator for this is available at : Fibrosis-4 (FIB-4) Index for Liver Fibrosis - 
MDCalc 
 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
9 
 
 
 
• There are different cut-offs for patients depending on whether their age. 
• For patients under 65 years of age a FIB-4 score < 1.3 reliably excludes 
advanced fibrosis. These patients can be managed in primary care 
• For patients ≥65 years old: a FIB-4 score <2.0 reliably excludes advanced 
fibrosis.  These patients can be managed in primary care. 
• If the FIB -4 s core is ≥ 1.3 (for under 65 year olds) or ≥2.0 for ≥65 years 
olds patients have a significant risk of having ad vanced fibrosis. Referral 
to a liver clinic or for fibroscan is recommended . If significant/advanced 
fibrosis is confirmed patients will receive appropriate treatment in secondary 
care.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
Referrals to the liver clinic will be reviewed by a consultant and some patients with 
suspected MASLD or MetALD where it is clear that they need a fibroscan to stage 
fibrosis will be triaged directly to a fibroscan.  This will typically be patients with a 
modestly raised FIB -4 score. This will more rapidly triage patients who need a 
subsequent liver clinic appointment. Direct access fibroscan is also available in some 
parts of the region. 
 
Patients whose fibroscan is < 8 kPa will be given lifestyle advice by the fibroscan 
technician and discharged back to primary care with appropriate follow up advice. 
Individuals with a fibroscan ≥ 8kPa will be reviewed in the liver clinic for a more 
detailed assessment. Those with suspected cirrhosis will be offered a “soon” 
appointment. 
 
 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
11 
STEP 6 – MANAGE PATIENTS WITH LOWER RISK MASLD or MetALD 
 
Currently the mainstay of management for patients with steatotic liver disease 
without advanced fibrosis is lifestyle modification and optimisation of diabetes and 
cardiovascular risk factors. 
 
• A care bundle is available for the management of MASLD (appendix 5) 
• Give patients advice about MASLD and its treatment. This leaflet from 
LIVErNORTH provides comprehensive information about steatotic liver 
disease. 11 Lifestyle and your liver - A guide to Steatotic Liver Disease by 
LIVErNORTH - Issuu 
• Lose weight if BMI >25 or raised waist circumference   
– Aim for at least a loss of 10% of body weight. 
– Refer to dietetics where appropriate  
– Consider referral to specialist weight management services if patients 
meet the criteria for bariatric surgery or GLP-1 analogues 
– Advise exercise at least 30 minutes 3 times per week (both 
cardiovascular and resistance exercise are beneficial even independent 
of weight loss) 
• Optimize control of diabetes 
– Use metformin, GLP-1 analogue or SGLT2 inhibitor where possible 
• Treat hypertension as per NICE guidelines 
• Drink sensibly – within current limits (<14 units per week for males and 
females). There is no evidence at present to recommend abstinence, except 
for patients with cirrhosis where abstinence is recommended. 
• Reduce other risk factors for vascular disease (https://nescn.nhs.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2021/07/NEELI-Final-10.2.pdf)  Statins are safe in patients 
with MASLD and should be actively prescribed as per NICE guidelines 
• Undertake an annual vascular disease risk score as patients with MASLD are 
more at risk from this than from direct effects on the liver. 
• Calculate the FIB-4 score every 3 years and refer if the FIB-4 score increases 
above the age-related cut-off. For patients >80 years old or those with 
significant other co-morbidity further FIB-4 testing may not be appropriate as it 
will be unlikely to change their management  

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
12 
 
APPENDIX 1  
 
Testing for Gilbert’s syndrome 
 
A solitary abnormal raised bilirubin result is likely to be due to Gilbert’s. Repeat 
testing should confirm that none of the other Liver blood tests are abnormal. A repeat 
fasting sample should show a further isolated rise in bilirubin. 
 
If you wish to confirm that the rise in bilirubin is unconjugated, send the sample 
wrapped (e.g. in a small envelope) within the usual pathology bag.  This will reduce 
light exposure (which leads to conjugation).  At low levels of bilirubin, testing for 
conjugation is unreliable (e.g. up to 25μmol/L). 
 
Confirm there is no evidence of haemolysis – reticulocytes and LDH will be normal 
(raised retics/LDH seen in haemolysis).  There is no need to test the urine. 
 
Samples required to confirm Gilbert’s: 
 
1 x SST 11 (gold top) wrapped 
1 x EDTA (lavender top) 
 
 
 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
13 
APPENDIX 2 
 
Samples required for full liver screen (Step 3) 
 
3x SST 11 (gold top) 
1 x Fluoride oxalate (grey top) 
2 x EDTA (lavender top) 
 
FBC 
Liver enzymes, AST and GGT 
HbA1c  
lipids 
ferritin 
Liver autoantibodies and TTG 
Immunoglobulins 
HBsAg, HCVAb and HIV. 
Transferrin saturation (if ferritin increased) 
 
 
 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
14 
APPENDIX 3 
After consideration, screening for Wilson’s disease and alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency 
has been left out of our recommended liver screen (Step 3).  This is due to the rarity 
of these conditions and the significant cost of the relevant tests.  However, you may 
want to consider these conditions in patients presenting with atypical features at a 
young age. 
 
Wilson’s disease 
An autosomal recessive disorder of hepatic copper metabolism.  Wilson’s disease 
most commonly presents in the teenage years and should always be considered in 
this context particularly in the presence of neuropsychiatric features.   However, 
Wilson’s disease can be very difficult to diagnose and there is no single diagnostic 
test that can exclude or confirm Wilson’s disease with 100% certainty.  Suspicion 
should be alerted in the patient with a low alkaline phosphatase level or Coomb’s 
negative haemolytic anaemia.  A low serum caeruloplasmin level is a useful screen 
but can be normal. 
 
Alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT) 
AAT is a proteinase inhibitor and mainly produced in the liver.  AAT disease of the 
liver is rare in adults.  Most commonly presenting within the first week of birth with 
jaundice.  AAT deficiency is particularly important in the lungs, especially with a 
history of smoking.  Be suspicious in the patient with COPD who has evidence of 
chronic liver disease but in the absence of obvious risk factors. Heterozygous 
carriers have an increased susceptibility to liver injury in the presence of a “second 
hit” on the liver as with excessive alcohol consumption. However, patients should be 
advised not to smoke and keep alcohol intake within recommended safe drinking 
limits. 
 
Coeliac disease 
Coeliac disease can present with cryptogenic liver disease with persistent 
“transaminitis” in up to 5 – 10% patients. This will often resolve with a gluten free diet 
but may persist and can be associated with autoimmune liver disease.  There is a 
reported increased association with haemochromatosis and a three-fold higher 
incidence of coeliac disease in MASLD as compared to the general population. 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
15 
However, be aware that in the presence of chronic liver disease tissue 
transglutaminase (TTG) antibodies can be falsely elevated. 
 
Hereditary Haemochromatosis 
 
Hereditary haemochromatosis is a common inherited (recessive) disorder of iron 
absorption.  This can result in iron deposition in tissues, mainly the liver but also 
other organs including the pancreas and heart.  The C282Y and H36D mutations 
within the HFE gene account for > 90% cases seen in our region.  There are at least 
4 other mutations that have been identified that account for the remaining 10% of 
cases but the tests are not widely available for clinical use.   
 
Generally speaking, we recommend HFE genotyping if the Transferrin saturation is > 
45% in the presence of a raised serum ferritin.   
 
Ferritin is an acute phase reactant and can be raised in a wide range of inflammatory 
conditions, obesity and Type 2 diabetes.  In addition, a raised serum ferritin is often 
seen in other liver conditions such as alcohol-related liver disease, hepatitis C and 
non–alcoholic steatohepatitis.   
 
Hereditary haemochromatosis is an important condition to diagnose as it is readily 
treatable (venesection) and has implications for other family members.  Those 
parents, siblings and children over the age of 20 years will require screening.   
 
Some patients ask for dietary advice.  They should avoid iron – rich foods and 
vitamin C supplements, minimize alcohol to within recommended safe drinking limits 
and advise weight loss in patients with central obesity. 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
16 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 4 
 
Adverse drug effects on the liver are important and should be considered when 
assessing patients with liver function abnormalities. 
 
This is not a comprehensive list but some of the commonest culprits are: 
NSAIDs 
 
Antibiotics: Flucloxacillin, Co-amoxiclav, 
 
Antiepileptics: Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, Sodium Valproate 
 
Antituberculous drugs: Rifampicin, Isoniazid, Ethambutol 
 
NB: Statin induced hepatotoxicity is very rare, and most abnormal liver blood tests in 
the setting of statin use are due to underlying metabolic dysfunction associated 
steatotic liver disease. 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
17 
APPENDIX 5 
 
Care bundle: Management of patients with steatotic (fatty) liver disease in 
primary care 
Date seen………………………… 
 
 
Weight (kg) Height (m) BMI BP (mmHg) 
Overweight/       □ 
Obesity             
Type 2 diabetes   □ 
Year diagnosed: …………. 
Hypertension     □ Dyslipidaemia     □ 
Current alcohol consumption                                                   units/week 
 
If alcohol consumption is greater than 14/21 units per week for females/males then advise reduction or abstinence 
Current FIB-4 score ……………………..                                         Last staging date: …………………… 
 Stage with FIB-4 at diagnosis and then re-stage every 3 years or more frequently                                                                   
Lifestyle changes  
Ensure information leaflets on NAFLD given              Y         N 
Change in weight since last review (+ or -)              kg                 % 
Target weight (aim >5% weight loss if overweight and >10% if obese)              kg 
Discuss/reinforce dietary advice              Y         N 
If not losing weight offer referral to dietician   Y     N     N/A    decline 
Discuss increasing activity/exercise              Y         N 
Managing metabolic risk factors 
Review BP  Y         N 
Review diabetic control/ screen for diabetes  Y         N 
Ensure on statin - If no, why not?                       Not tolerated   □    Low risk   □                                    
(statins are recommended for patients with T2DM or a QRISK2 >10%) 
 Y         N  
Smoking cessation advice  Y         N     N/A 
When to refer to hepatology 
Consider referral if FIB-4 score >1.3 for <65 years and >2.0 for ≥ 65yrs  Y     N     N/A 
Routine investigations:  FBC, U/E, LFT, AST, GGT, HbA1c, glucose, lipids. 
 

 
 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
18 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
 
19 
Asymptomatic Liver Blood Test Abnormalities 
Raised ALT or GGT 
 
  Raised ALT or GGT 
≥ X 3 Normal ≤ X 3 Normal 
FBC and AST 
Liver screen: 
HBsAg, HCV, HIV 
Autoantibodies 
Ferritin 
Fasting Glucose or 
HbA1c 
Immunoglobulins 
TTG 
Ultrasound Scan 
In 1-3 months repeat: 
LFT, AST/FBC 
Normal ALT or GGT 
No further 
action if no risk 
factors for liver 
disease 
Refer to 
Liver Clinic 
Raised ALT or GGT 
Liver screen 
Positive 
Liver screen 
Refer 
MASLD suspected 
Calculate FIB-4 score 
http://gihep.com/calculators/hepatolo
gy/fibrosis-4-score/ 
<1.3 for age <65 yrs 
<2.0 for age ≥65 yrs 
Lifestyle advice 
If in doubt 
discuss with the 
on-call Liver 
Consultant 
≥1.3 for age <65 yrs 
≥2.0 for age ≥65 yrs 
Refer 

 
Version History: Date: Feb 2024 Version: V3.1 Review Date: Feb 2026 
 
 
20 
Asymptomatic Liver Blood Test Abnormalities 
 
Jaundice 
Raised bilirubin with raised 
ALP or ALT 
 
No Jaundice 
Immediate  
referral to  
Liver Clinic 
Urgent 
referral to 
Liver Clinic 
Urgent e 
referral 
according 
to local 
policy 
Choose and 
Book or  
paper referral 
Isolated raised bilirubin 
Repeat fasting blood sample, 
LFTs and FBC 
No Anaemia Anaemia 
Probable  
Gilbert’s  
Syndrome 
Haemolysis  
screen: 
Haptoglobins 
LDH 
Reticulocyte 
count 
Isolated raised ALP 
Repeat LFTs with γGT, AST 
& FBC 
Normal γGT Raised γGT 
Consider 
Bone: 
Paget’s 
Vitamin D 
deficiency 
Liver Screen: 
HBsAg, HCV, HIV 
Autoantibodies 
Ferritin 
Blood Glucose 
Immunogloblulins 
TTG 
Ultrasound scan 